---
title: 'CFG and algebraic system'
date: 2020-05-10
permalink: /posts/2020/05/CFGandAS
tags:
  - Math
---

# Introduction

Let's see an example which will be helpful for readers with some background in algebraic systems. Reader without this background should consult it when algebraic system will be defined in the following part. 

*Example 1* Let $G = (\{y\}, \Sigma, P, y)$, with $\Sigma = \{x,\bar x\}$ and $P = \{y\to xy\bar x y, y\to \varepsilon \}$ be a CFG. We now associate to $G$ the equation $y = \{x\}y\{\bar x\}y\cup \{\varepsilon \}$ and construct its solution in the semiring $2^{\Sigma ^*}$ by the following procedure (the order is the subset order): We start with $\sigma^0=\emptyset$, and subsitute $\sigma^n$ into the equation to obtain $\sigma^{n+1}$, hence we have: 
$$\sigma^0=\emptyset,\ \ \ \sigma^1=\{\varepsilon\},\ \ \ \sigma^2=\{x\bar x,\varepsilon\}, 
 \sigma^3=\{x\bar x\bar x\bar x x\bar x, xx\bar x\bar x, x\bar x x\bar x, \varepsilon\},\dots$$

And we find easily that $\sigma^n$ contains exactly those words of $L(G)$ that are the results of derevation trees of height at most $n,n\geq 1$. We call the sequence $\sigma^0, \sigma^1, \sigma^2,\dots$ approximate sequence. And we can see this is monotone, so the least upper bound is $\cup_{n\geq 0} \sigma^{n}$ and this is exactly $L(G)$.

# Preliminaries
First, we will consider the continue monoids and the notion of continuous monoid is a specialization of the continuous algebras.

Secondly, we will consider algebraic properties of formal series.

And also, the fixed point theory is very important in this note, so we will give a short introduction into fixed point theory of continuous functions and refer to a few results of this theory.

> *Def. 1* A commutative monoid $\langle A,+,0 \rangle$ is called **ordered** iff it is equipped with a partial order $\leq$ preserved by $+$ operation such that $0\leq a$ holds for all $a\in A$. It then follows that $a \leq a + b$ for all $a, b\in A$.
In particular, a commutative monoid $\langle A, +, 0 \rangle$ is called **natural order** iff the order $\leq$ defined by: $a\leq b$ iff there exists a $c$ such that $a+c=b$, is a partial order. 

> *Def. 2* A monoid $\langle A,+,0 \rangle$ is called **complete** iff it has sums for all families $(a_i|i\in I)$ of elements of $A$, such that the following conditions are satisfied:
>
> (I) $\sum_{i\in \emptyset} a_i = 0, \sum_{i\in\{j\}}a_i = a_j \sum_{i\in\{j,k\}} a_i = a_j+a_k$, for $j\neq k$
> 
> (II) $\sum_{j\in J}(\sum_{i\in I_{j}}a_i)=\sum_{i\in I}a_i$ if $\cup_{j\in J}I_j=I$ and $I_{j}\cap I_{j^{\prime}}=\emptyset$ for $j\neq j^{\prime}$
We can see from the definition, any complete monoid is commutative.

Recall that a non-empty subset $D$ of a poset $P$ is called **directed** iff each pair of elements of $D$ has an upper bound in $D$. And we say a function $f:P\to Q$ is **continuous** iff it preserves the least upper bound of any directed set, i.i., when $f(\sup D) = \sup f(D)$. And we can see easily, any continuous function preserves the order.

> *Def. 3* An ordered commutative monoid is called a **continuous monoid** iff each directed subset of $A$ has a least upper bound and $+$ preserves the least upper bound of directed set, i.e., when 
> $$a+\sup D=\sup(a+D)$$
By the definition we can easily see that an ordered commutative monoid $A$ is continuous iff each chain in $A$ has a least upper bound and $+$ operation preserves least upper bound of the chains.

> *Proposition 4* Any continuous monoid $\langle A,+,0\rangle$ is a complete monoid equipped with the following sum operation:
> $$\sum_{i\in I} \sup\{\sum_{i\in E}a_i|E\subseteq I, E\text{ finite}\}$$
> for all index sets $I$ and all families $(a_i |i\in I)$ in $A$. Any morphism between continuous monoid is a complete monoid morphism
> *Def. 5* A semiring $\langle A,+,\cdot,0,1\rangle$ is called **ordered** if $\langle A,+,0\rangle$ is a continuous monoid and $\cdot$ preserves the order. When the order on $A$ is the natural order, the semiring will automatically an ordered semiring. 
> *Def. 6* A semiring is called **continuous** if $\langle A,+,0\rangle$ is a continuous monoid and multiplication is continuous. And it follows that the distribution laws for infinte sum: 
> $$a\cdot(\sum_{i\in I}a_i)=(\sum_{i\in I}a\cdot a_i)\text{ and }(\sum_{i\in I}a_i)\cdot a=(\sum_{i\in I}a_i\cdot a)$$
> for all families $(a_i|i\in I)$
A morphism of continuous semirings is a semiring morphism which is a continuous function. Note that every continuous semiring is an ordered semiring and every continuous semiring morphism is an ordered semiring morphism.

Now we were defined by the "French school" using a purely algebraic definition. And now we want to use topological method to justify the algebraic definition.

In the part, we consider monoids $\langle A,\cdot,1\rangle$, which are commutative in most cases and will then be written additively, i.e. as $\langle A,+,0\rangle$. Non-commutative monoids will occur as the multiplicative structure of semirings.

> *Def. 7* A function $f:A^n\to A,n\geq 1$, on a commutative monoid $\langle A,+,0\rangle$ is **distributive**, if for all $j\leq n$ and all $a_1,\dots,a_n,b_1,b_2\in A$
> $$f(a_1,\dots,a_{j-1},0,a_{j+1},\dots,a_n)=0 \tag 1$$
> $$f(a_1,\dots,a_{j-1},b_1+b_2,a_{j+1},\dots,a_n)= f(a_1,\dots,a_{j-1},b_1,a_{j+1},\dots,a_n) +f(a_1,\dots,a_{j-1},b_2,a_{j+1},\dots,a_n)\tag 2$$
A commutative monoid $\langle A,+,0\rangle$ together with a number of constants and distributive functions on $A$ is a **distributive algebra**. For the sake of conciseness and clarity, we will consider only such class of algebras explicity, vie. the semirings.

A semiring $\langle A,+,0,\cdot,1\rangle$ is a distributive algebra such that $\langle A,\cdot, 1\rangle$ is a monoid.

Given a family $(a_i|i\in I)$, we write $F\subseteq_{fin} I$ for finite subsets $F\subseteq I$, and $a_F$ for $\sum_{i\in F}a_i$, and $(a_F|F\subseteq_{fin}I)$ for the **net** of all $a_F$'s over the partially ordered index set $(\{F|F\subseteq_{fin} I\},\subseteq)$.

> *Def. 8* A function $f:A^n\to A,n\geq 1$ on a complete monoid $\langle A,+,0,\Sigma \rangle$ is **complete** or $\Sigma-preserving$, if for all $j\leq n$, all $a_1,\dots,a_n\in A$, and families $(b_i|i\in I)$ on $A$, 
$$f\left(a_1,\dots,a_{j-1},\sum_{i\in I}b_i,a_{j+1},\dots,a_k\right)=\sum_{i\in I}f\left(a_1,\dots,a_{j-1},b_i,a_{j+1},\dots,a_k\right)\tag 3$$ 
Note that every $\Sigma-preserving$ function is distributive. A **complete semiring** $\langle A,+,\cdot, 0,1,\Sigma\rangle$ is a complete monoid $\langle A,+,0,\Sigma\rangle$ which is at the same time a semiring $\langle A,+,\cdot,0,1\rangle$ such that $\cdot$ is $\Sigma-preserving$.

If $\langle A,+,0,\Sigma\rangle$ is complete, the **summation topology** on $A$ is the collection of all sets $O\subseteq A$ satisfying the following condition. If $\sum_{i\in I}a_i\in O$ then there is $F_0\subseteq_{fin} I$ such that $a_F\in O$ for each $F$ with $F_0\subseteq F\subseteq_{fin} I$. 

Then we can directly have the following characterization from the definition.

> *Lemma. 1* Let $\langle A,+,0,\Sigma\rangle$ be a complete monoid. A subset $X\subseteq A$ is closed in the summation topology iff, for every net $(a_F| F\subseteq_{fin} I)$ which is frequently in $X$ we have $\sum_{i\in I} a_i\in X$
We can see that the summation topology is not Hausdorff.

A **semitopological** monoid $(A,\cdot,1,\tau)$ is a monoid $(A,\cdot,1)$ with a Hausdorff topology $\tau$ such that $\cdot$ is continuous in each argument.

A commutative semitopological monoid $(A,+,0,\tau)$ is st-complete, if all nets $(a_{F}|F\subseteq_{fin} I)$ converge.

> *Thm. 2* Every st-complete monoid $(A+,0,\tau)$ becomes a complete monoid $(A,+,0,\Sigma)$ under 
> $$\sum_{i\in I} a_i=\lim (a_F|F\subseteq_{fin} I)\tag{4}$$
> where $\lim$ is taken w.r.t. $\tau$. Moreover, every distributive, argumentwise continuous function on $(A,+,0,\tau)$ is $\Sigma$-preserving.
And also we can see, a semitopological semiring $(A,+,\cdot,0,1,\tau)$ is a semiring $(A,+,\cdot,0,1)$ with a topology $\tau$ such that both $(A,+,0,\tau)$ and $(A,\cdot,1,\tau)$ are semitopological monoids. A semitopological semiring is st-complete if the underlying semitopological monoid is.

> *Corollary 3* Every st-complete semiring $(A,+,\cdot,0,1,\tau)$ is a complete semiring $(A,+,\cdot,0,1,\Sigma)$, where the summation is given by (4)
In fact, Corollary 3 only uses the fact that $\cdot$ is distributive and argumentwise continuous. This allows use Corollary 3 for arbitrary st-complete distributive algebras. Such generalisations will be possible for other results as well but will be stated for
semirings only.

> *Example 2.* Let **Q**=$(\mathbb{Q}^{\infty}_{+},+,\cdot,0,1,\leq,\tau)$ be the one-point compactification of the discrete space $\mathbb{Q}_{+}$ of non-negative rational numbers and let $\leq$ denote the usual order. Let the semiring operations be extended for $x\in\mathbb{Q}$ as follows: 
> $$x+\infty=\infty+x=\infty,x\cdot \infty=\infty\cdot x=\infty\text{ if x}\neq\text{0, }x\cdot \infty=\infty\cdot x=0\text{ if x = 0}$$
> Then **Q** is an st-complete semiring, hence complete by Corollary 3.
The proof is trivial, left as exercise.

Examples of continuous semiring include $\mathbb{B},\mathbb{N}^\infty$, the tropical semirings, the semiring $2^{\Sigma^*}$ of formal languages over $\Sigma$.

Suppose that $A$ is a semiring and $\Sigma$ is an alphabet. Note that $A\langle\langle \Sigma^*\rangle\rangle$ may be equipped with a **scalar multiplication** $A\times A\langle\langle \Sigma^*\rangle\rangle\to A\langle\langle \Sigma^*\rangle\rangle$, $(a,s)\mapsto as$, defined by $(as,u)=a(s,u)$ for all $u\in\Sigma^*$. Here and in the sequel, $\Sigma$ denote a finite alphabet. When $s\in A\langle \Sigma^*\rangle$ then also $as$. This operations satisfies the following euqations, and we denote the following euqations by (1)-(5):

$$
\begin{aligned}
a(bs) &= (ab)s \\ 
1s&=s\\
(a+b)s&=as+bs\\
a(s+s')&=as+as'\\
a0&=0
\end{aligned}
$$

for all $a,b\in A,s,s'\in A\langle\langle \Sigma^*\rangle\rangle$. It follows that 
$$0s=0$$
 for all $s$. Moreover if $A$ is communitive we have 

$$(as)(bs')=(ab)(ss')\tag{6}$$ 

for all $a,b\in A, s,s'\in A\langle\langle \Sigma^*\rangle\rangle$

> *Thm 4* Suppose that $A$ is a commutative semiring and $S$ is a semiring equipped with a scalar multiplication $A\times S\to S$, $(a,s)\mapsto as$ which satisfies the euqations (1)-(6). Then any function $\varphi:\Sigma \to S$ extends to a unique semiring morphism $\varphi ^{\sharp}:A\langle\Sigma^*\rangle\to S$ preserving scalar multiplication.
*Proof.* It is well-know that $\varphi$ extend to a unique monoid morphism morphism $\bar \varphi:\Sigma^*\to S$. We futher extend $\bar \varphi$ to $\varphi^{\sharp}$ by definition **Q.E.D.**

$$\varphi^{\sharp}=\sum_{u\in \Sigma^*}(s,u)\bar\varphi(u)$$ 
for all $s\in A\langle\Sigma^*\rangle$.

A semilar result holds when $A$ is a complete commutative semiring, so that $A\langle\langle\Sigma^*\rangle\rangle$ is a complete semiring equipped with a scalar multiplication defined above.

> *Thm 5* Suppose that $A$ is a commutative string and $S$ is a semiring equipped with a scalar multiplication $A\times S\to S,(a,s)\mapsto as$, which satisfies the euqation (1)-(6). Then any function $\varphi:\Sigma \to S$ extends to a unique semiring morphism $\varphi^\sharp :A \langle \Sigma ^* \rangle\to S$ preserving scalar multiplication.
*Proof.* It is well-know that $\varphi$ extends to a unique monoid morphism morphism $\bar\varphi:\Sigma^*\to S$. We further extend $\bar\varphi$ to $\varphi^\sharp$ by a natuarl way:
$$\varphi^\sharp(s)=\sum_{u\in\Sigma^*}(s,u)\bar\varphi(u)$$
for all $s\in A\langle \Sigma^*\rangle$. **Q.E.D.**

A similar result holds when $A$ is a complete commutative semiring, so that $A\langle\langle \Sigma^*\rangle\rangle$ is a complete semiring equipped with a scalar multiplication defined above.

When $A$ is an ordered by $\leq$, we may order $A\langle\langle \Sigma^*\rangle\rangle$ and thus $A\langle \Sigma^*\rangle$, by the pointwise order: We define $s\leq s'$ for $s,s'\in A\langle \langle \Sigma^*\rangle\rangle$ iff $(s,u)\leq (s',u)$ for all $u\in\Sigma^*$. So finally we have if $A$ is a continuous semiring, then $A\langle\langle\Sigma^*\rangle\rangle$ is also continous, and scalar multiplication preserves least upper bounds of directed sets in both arguments.

> *Corollary 6* Suppose that $A$ is an ordered commutative semiring and $S$ is an ordered semiring equipped with an order preserving scalar multiplication which satisfies (1)-(6). Then any function $\varphi:\Sigma\to S$ extends a unqiue orderd semiring morphism $\varphi^\sharp:A\langle \Sigma^*\rangle\to S$ preserving scalar multiplication. Moreover, when $A$ is a continous commutative semiring and $S$ is a comtinous semiring equipped with a continous scalar multiplication which stisfies above equations, then any function $\varphi$ extends to a unique continous semiring morphism preserving scalar multiplication.
Let $A$ denote a continous commutative semiring where sum are defined by *Prop 4*. Let $s$ be a formal series in $A\langle\langle \Sigma^*\rangle\rangle$, and let $S$ denote a continuous semiring equipped with a scalar multiplication which satisfies (1)-(6) which is also continuous. The set $S^\Sigma$ of all functions $\Sigma\to S$ is also a continuous semiring equipped with the pointwise operations and oedering as is the set of all continuous functions $S^\Sigma\to S$. Moreover, it is equipped with the pointwise scalar multiplication which again satisfies (1)-(6) and is continuous. Now $s$ induces a mapping $s^S:S^\Sigma\to S, h\mapsto h^\sharp(s)$ for $h\in S^\Sigma$

> *Prop 7* The function $s^S$ is continuous. Moreover, the assignment $s\to s^S$ defines a continuous function of $s$
*Proof.* It is known that when $u\in\Sigma^*$, then the functoin induced by $u$ is continuous. Since scalar multiplication and $+$ are continuous, so is any function indeced by a series in $A\langle\Sigma^*\rangle$. But pointwise sup of the fuctions induced by the polynamials $\sum_{u\in F}(s,u)u$, where $F$ is finite. Since the pointwise sup of continuous functions is continuous, the result follows.

To show that the assignment $s\mapsto s^S$ defines a continuous function, let $D$ denoted set in $A\langle\langle\Sigma^*\rangle\rangle$. We want to prove that 
$$(\sup_{s\in D}s)^S=\sup_{s\in D}s^S$$
But for any $h:\Sigma\to S$
$$
\begin{aligned}
(\sup_{s\in D}s)^S(h)&=h^\sharp(\sup_{s\in D}s) \\
&= \sup_{s\in D} h^\sharp(s) \\
&= \sup_{s\in S} s^S(h) \\
&= (\sup_{s\in S}s^S)(h)
\end{aligned}
$$
**Q.E.D.**

From now on we will write just $h$ for $h^\sharp$ and denote $s^S$ by just $s$.

In particular, formal series induce continuous mappings called *substitutions* as follows. Let $Y$ denote a non-empty set of variables, where $Y\cap \Sigma = \empty$, and consider a mapping $h: (\Sigma\cup Y)^*\to A\langle\langle(\Sigma\cup Y)^*\rangle\rangle$ by setting first $h(x) = x,x\in \Sigma$. Now by the above result, for any series $s\in A\langle\langle(\Sigma\cup Y)^*\rangle\rangle$, the mapping $h\mapsto h(s)$ is a continuous function of $h$. By the arguments outline above, $h(s)$ can be constructed as follows. First extend $h$ to words $u=u_1u_2\dots u_k$ with $u_i\in \Sigma\cup Y$ by defining 
$$h(u)=h(u_1)\dots h(u_k)=\sum_{v_1,\dots,v_k\in(\Sigma\cup Y)^*} (h(u_1),v_1)\dots(h(u_k),v_k)v_1\dots v_k$$
One more extension of $h$ yields a mapping $h:A\langle\langle (\Sigma\cup Y)^*\rangle\rangle\to A\langle\langle (\Sigma\cup Y)^*\rangle\rangle$ with $h(s) = \sum_{u\in(\Sigma\cup Y)^*}(s,u)h(u)$, for all $s\in A\langle\langle (\Sigma\cup Y)^*\rangle\rangle$. Now $s(h)$ is just the value of this extended function on $s$. If $Y=\{y_1,\dots,y_n\}$ is finite, we use the following notation: $h:Y\to A\langle\langle (\Sigma\cup Y)^*\rangle\rangle$, where $h(y_i)=s_i, 1\leq i \leq n$, is denoted by $s(s_i,1\leq i,n)$ or $s(s_1,\dots,s_n)$. Intutively, this is simply the *substitution* of the formal series $s_i\in A\langle\langle (\Sigma\cup Y)^*\rangle\rangle$ in to variable $y_i$ of $s\in A\langle\langle (\Sigma\cup Y)^*\rangle\rangle$. And also we have the mapping $s:(A\langle\langle (\Sigma\cup Y)^*\rangle\rangle)^Y\to A\langle\langle (\Sigma\cup Y)^*\rangle\rangle$ is a continuous functoin.

The construction of series and the above freeness results can be generalized to a great extent. Suppose taht $M$ is any monoid and $A$ is any complete commutative semiring. Then the set of functions $M\to A$ denoted $A\langle\langle M\rangle\rangle$, is a mutative semiring. We call the elements of $A\langle\langle M \rangle\rangle$ series and denote them as $\sum_{m\in M}(s,m)m$, or $\sum_{m\in supp(s)}(s,m)m$. The sum of any family of series is their pointwise sum. The zero series serves as zero. In this semiring $A\langle\langle M\rangle\rangle$, for each $s_1,s_2\in A\langle\langle M\rangle\rangle$,
$$s_1s_2=\sum_{m\in M}(\sum_{m=m_1m_2}(s_1,m_1)(s_2,m_2))m$$

Note that $A\langle\langle M\rangle\rangle$ is equipped with a scalar multiplication $A\times A\langle\langle M\rangle\rangle\to A\langle\langle M\rangle\rangle$. Moreover, equations (1)-(6),(7),(8) holds.

When $A$ is a continuous semiring then, equipped with the pointwise oeder, $A\langle\langle M\rangle\rangle$ is a continuous semiring and scalar multiplication is continuous. We are ready to state the promised generalization of *Thm 5.* and *Corollary 6*.

> *Thm 8* Suppose that $A$ is a complete commutative semiring and $S$ is a complete semiring equipped with a scalar multiplication $A\times S\to S$ which satisfies the equations (1)-(8). Moreover, assume that $M$ is a monoid. Then any monoid morphism $\varphi:M\to S$ extends to a unique complete semiring morphism $\varphi^\sharp: A\langle\langle M\rangle\rangle \to S$ preserving scalar multiplication. When $A$ is a continuous commutative semiring and $S$ is continuous, moreover, the scalar multiplication $A\times S\to S$ is continuous, then so is the function $\varphi^\sharp$
